no food no water no fuel and nowhere to
go as Israel's bombing of Gaza
intensifies Palestinians are facing an
unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe
what will it take for life saving Aid to
reach the besiege enclave and can a
disaster be prevented this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
fully batibo Gaza is facing a
humanitarian crisis of catastrophic
proportions Israel's total Siege of The
Enclave has cut off supplies of food
water and fuel for more than a week
borders are closed so Aid isn't getting
in and people aren't getting out all
this says Israel's bombing campaign
kills and injures thousands of
Palestinians many of them children we'll
go to our panel in just a moment but
first Finton Monahan has this
report Palestinians in Gaza are
desperate for the most basic necessities
of
life Israel has cut off supplies of food
water fuel and electricity to the
already besieged
Enclave its Relentless bombing campaign
has forced hundreds of thousands from
their homes and put further strain on
already limited
resources seven homeless families in my
house I've been here since 7:00 a.m. is
this enough for seven families with
their
children my house has had no water for 5
days yesterday all we got was salt
water Israel has told 1.1 million people
in north of Gaza to leave ahead of
intense military
action families are gathering everything
they can carry and heading
south but all that awaits them is a
closed border Israeli bombing has forced
the closure of the Rafa Crossing with
Egypt and there are concerns about a
potential influx of
refugees Aid trucks are lined up on the
Egyptian side of the Border unable to
enter the United Nations is trying to
convince all parties to allow the aid
through we need to get Aid to those
people for two reasons number one to
make their movement safe to where they
want to go voluntarily and two to
sustain them while they're there because
they won't get out of Gaza and then need
to be helped in Gaza so Aid access is
our overwhelming priority and we are in
deep discussions hourly with the
Israelis with the Egyptians with the
gazans about how to do
that the humanitarian crisis is growing
worse by the day in addition to the
rising number of Palestinians killed the
Israeli bombardment has injured
thousands we have no resources no
equipment to help those trapped under
the rubble no medical facilities to
treat the injured we are digging with
our bare hands this is a
disaster as food and water run short
more and more people will fall ill and
when the last of the fuel Runs Out
hospitals will struggle to keep them
alive Finton Monahan for Inside
Story let's bring in our guests now in
Gaza is njla shawa oxfarm spokesperson
and a Gaza a resident her family is one
of the hundreds of thousands displaced
right now because of the Israeli
bombardment in Oxford in the UK is Dr
Nick mayard a consultant surgeon who
visits Gaza regularly to train medical
students and doctors and he's also a
member of the UK based charity Medical
Aid for Palestine and in Cairo Egypt is
Sarah Kira founder and director of the
European North African Center for
research a warm welcome to you all thank
you for joining us on Inside Story NJ
shawa in Gaza please let me start with
you it's been more than 10 days now
since the Israeli bombardment of Gaza
began and it's feared that the situation
the humanitarian situation could get
much worse can you just tell us first
about what the current situation is
inside Gaza and um how much longer can
people hold on for without any AIDS
coming into the besieged
territory the situation is um is very
devastating as it is the severity and
the extent of uh of attacks and air
strikes on homes and
infrastructure that has been been
continuous the past days have uh have
not given any opportunity for any um for
anything that can be restored or or even
for families to connect to communicate
to to even move their own belongings uh
families have been for example moving to
our home in Gaza City prior to this uh
move to the South that we all did all
together we were already uh 20 22 or
more in our house and we moved all
together to to this place and the
situation is is uh is extremely dire uh
because uh there is no access to fuel
there is no there is damaged and
destroyed
infrastructure uh waste water treatment
plants there is no access to water uh
and there is very limited capacity to to
physically move even within the cities
and within the towns right let me just
ask you something briefly yeah nla nla
you talked about water there the
Israelis have said uh that they've
restored water to some parts of Gaza
which Hamas has denied can you tell us
uh about some of the basic necessities
that you have right now you and your
family is there any water at all is
there any any food are you able to get
uh bread for example or is that running
out completely
now yeah the situation where I am in
central Gaza is less problematic than
the the South where there is more um um
numbers of uh of people displaced the
the more heavily populated areas like in
hunas and in Rafa but mind you the air
strikes have not stopped have not
stopped in kanun or in ra or in central
area or on the road that they claim to
be a safe passage during the evacuation
after the the instructions that the
Israelis have put out so and also
regarding the claim of the of the water
I don't have official information on on
whether it's actually it's back or not
but because the problem is much comp
much more complicated than this you have
water networks that have been destroyed
an entire infrastructure that has been
destroyed that is mainly affecting this
distribution of water so even if it is a
connected which I'm I'm not sure about
and I cannot confirm it has also limited
um a path so not the entire South would
get it it gets to a certain area and
then it has to be like reservoirs and
then has to be redistributed and this
capacity is no longer there with no fuel
for generators no uh and no no proper
Network so it's it's something for the
media I suspect that's my my personal
opinion and when it comes to other
issues like this area of of mine the
problem is that we're not connected to
public network we rely on water weth and
because we rely on water wells water
wells have been so depleted and so bad
in terms of quality we cannot use it for
drinking and even if we have the
capacity which is now every day we are
trying to resolve the problem for the
people here is to get fuel because we
had some fuel from before we are still
managing however we have only drinking
water and until tomorrow and we are
about 60 people here and we don't know
if tomorrow we will be able to find the
the the the water vendor uh in in the
area available to bring us water this is
all very uncertain and very very
critical we also depend on on uh fuel to
pump water for cleaning and uh and
washing so it's it's just complicated
you describe a very dire situation there
in N briefly on food and then I'll I'll
uh bring in Dr May to talk to us the
situation in the hospitals in Gaza right
the food situation I think there was a
statement that was issued today uh from
the world food program which is quite
alarming because the situation is
already very Bleak you have to be aware
of that before October 7th uh this
program has been suffering from a lack
of funding to support very poor
population now it's saying that food
will actually supplies will run out
within four days so the stocks that's
available in the this trip will will be
uh will be um uh depleted uh will not be
no longer be available in the coming
four days and this is very very critical
and the problem there is no window no
hope uh for any um for any humanitarian
Corridor for any ceasefire or anything
like that and without such it's
impossible uh just but to see suffering
uh more and more evident what else is
the world waiting for for more crisis he
not even reaching the news because of
also no communication we will discuss
the the question of humanitarian cordos
in just a moment njla but I want to
bring in Dr mayard in Oxford Dr mayard
as njla said there the situation was
Bleak even before this latest conflict
began there were already shortages of
medical supplies in hospitals medical
equipment what are you hearing about the
current situation in hospitals across
Gaza whether it's in the North or in the
South where some hospitals have been
asking to relocate to move patients to
the South which has been extremely
difficult of course what are you hearing
about the conditions in these
hospitals uh that the situation is
absolutely desperate and there is a very
clear view and I that I share that the
Health Care system in Gaza is on the
verge of total collapse if um Aid is not
allowed in I hear that up to four
hospitals in Gaza are unable to function
at all as hospitals because the
infrastructure has been so badly damaged
um I've had most reports from chifa
hospital uh which is where the hospital
I've spent most of my time in um over
the years and they are essentially
hanging on but with extremely limited
resources they're very worried about the
amount of water they have and they're
rationing that now uh they are very
frightened that the fuel that is serving
their generators is about to run out and
and if that runs out out uh then they
will no longer be able to keep people
alive on ventilators so the minute that
fuel runs out all ventilated patients
will likely die it'll be extremely
difficult to run an operating theater
without electricity from the generators
so they're in a state of of of appalling
desperation and near collapse of the
Whole Health Care system and Dr mayard
when you're talking about access to
clean water the lack of access to clean
water you're talking about also here the
possibility of a of an even wider and an
even larger Health crisis aren't you
most certainly I mean the the washing
facilities are are very very few and far
between dirty water is a big concern and
the the situations are absolutely right
for outbreaks of of communal infectious
diseases and that's a very very real
risk of of sweeping through the Garen
population Sarah let me bring you into
the conversation Sarah um immediate
unconditional access to life-saving Aid
in Gaza is what the United Nations is
calling for today and a number of
agencies including who UNICEF wfp and
unra say they're all ready to bring Aid
in to Gaza through the Rafa Crossing
with Egypt but also through the Israel
border with Gaza why is that not
happening why why is Aid not going into
Gaza is it being
politicized well uh thank you for having
me first and it's very important to
explain the history behind that
everything that the doctor in the UK
mentioned and njla in Gaza mentioned
this has been the situation for Gaza for
the past 18 years it's very important to
point out that this is not the state
that Gaza has been living under for just
the past week or the past 10 days it is
the situation that the Gaza people the
Gaza population the place the Gaza Strip
that is the most populated place in the
world okay this is the dire situation
that everyone has been facing in Gaza
for the past 18 years because Gaza has
been under siege and block it for the
past 18 years and it's very important to
point out that Israel has the control
control over six six crossing gates or
Crossing
Borders uh Gates like the Rafa one but
but the Rafa one is shared between the
Egyptian Authority and uh um uh Israel
okay so they have the authority over six
Crossing Borders out of seven and they
are still not letting the aid in it's
very important to point out that the
Gaza people are under Collective
punishment okay Collective punishment
and and and and this is not an easy
situation to live under uh like the
doctor mentioned the status of the
hospitals according according to
humanitarian reports out of only one
person one individual has a bed in a
hospital for everyone to understand
where we're talking about out of 1,000
people this is the situation that Gaza
has been living under reports are
everywhere humanitarian reports can
checked indeed Sarah let me just pick up
on something you've said and that is
that Israel controls six border
crossings into GA Gaza and they're
refusing to let Aid in Egypt as you said
controls the Rafa Crossing uh the Rafa
Crossing in southern Gaza now there's
been talk in the last few days of
opening that Crossing uh Rafa Crossing
to let Aid in through Egypt and also
allow people dual Nationals to get out
out of the Gaza Strip right why has that
not happened what conditions is Egypt uh
putting on to allow that Rafa Crossing
to open or is it the Israelis who's
putting the pressure on uh a Rafa right
now is it Egypt or is it the Israelis
okay I'll explain to you uh this is the
only Crossing border that uh uh that is
shared Authority between Israel and
Egypt from our part from the Egyptian
border it's open and we have hundreds
and tons of uh uh resources to let into
our brothers and sisters inside of Gaza
but the
whole stalling comes from Israel part
The Crossing border from our part is
open and with all the convoys with tons
of things waiting on the border and
Israel doesn't let it in we needed we
needed something to guarantee that
Israel would let the humanitarian into
Gaza so we said we're not letting any
other uh uh uh nationalities rather than
the Palestinians get outside of that
border and we have foreigners other uh
uh nationality holders Americans French
and everyone waiting on the border to be
evacuated from the RAF Crossing border
with Israel bombing the Rafa border from
their side so they don't even respect
the other nationality who are not
Palestinians who are waiting to be
evacuating and that's an Egyptian
Condition it's very important to point
out that's an Egyptian condition just to
pressure and force Israel to let the
humanitarian Aid in and they didn't
abide to that deal we needed a deal
settlement just a fast deal to let the
humanitarian convoys get into Gaza and
they didn't let that first they H H put
a condition to inspect the convoys and
there are tons of convoys so
Egypt said we are responsible for that
and we are responsible for letting the
humanitarian Aid inside Gaza and it's
under our
supervision with us uh uh of course
supervision as well and they don't want
to let the humanitarian Aid in Sarah let
me bring na njla on this njla what are
you what is your understanding as to
what's happening at the RAF of Crossing
with Egypt of course the aid could come
in through uh the border with Israel as
well six Crossings there but there's
been a lot of Focus right now on Rafa
there are lots of a convoys waiting
outside of Rafa to cross into Gaza with
Aid much needed Aid what is your
understanding as to what's happening at
that border crossing and the conditions
in which this Aid would be allowed into
Gaza you know honestly it's not very
clear uh I mean it it's very vague even
from trying to read from from the media
so I don't have I don't I I can't claim
I have any more information except that
how we read it in in in in Gaza is that
there's a concern also by the Egyptians
that uh that this would be an um an
evacuation that would lead to actually a
transfer uh kind of of Palestinians to a
refugee kind of state at the border and
um and you know of course Palestinians
don't want that uh the Egyptians uh
don't want that and if um if Israel is
is is pushing towards that or whatever
um um some other world leaders are
involved in such discussions or such
plan this is how it's kind of brought up
in in in the back of our minds as
Palestinians living here is the minute I
left my home from Gaza City to Central
Gaza I had this fear immediately is this
another in 1948 are we going to come
back so that's one thing but on on on
the other side of uh it's it's not clear
if um if um if there is any uh sincere
how can I say I mean Israel would not
really um care much I mean it's for them
it's it's their operation and their
their you know their business that
matters it doesn't matter uh it's just
the amount of pressure that they are put
on H put under to allow it and it seems
it's not enough so this will will will
have to will have to be
seen in the coming days if the us will
have more more more of that pressure is
it only to evacuate their citizens or
other nationality it's really a chaos uh
a friend went to to the Border yesterday
because the minute they were saying that
they have a window that they can go all
uh and and actually cross nobody crossed
nothing there was another Attack On the
Border it's a total mess and a friend on
the other side tells me yeah I mean the
the cars the aid trucks are standing
there yeah as people congregate congrate
towards a southern border with with Gaza
there there are of course uh some
cascading effects uh that are being
created there nla I wanted to ask you
one more uh question um about the aid
before I bring back Dr mayard uh to talk
about what the most immediate needs are
right now njla I just wanted to ask you
about something Israel has said and and
most specifically the former prime
minister y lapid who said that Hamas is
trying to prevent aid from coming into
Gaza accusing Hamas of taking some of
the aid some of the goods that were left
in the shelters that the UN had to
evacuate
from did you see any evidence of this
njla um any evidence that Hamas is
preventing aid from coming in as Israel
say um I haven't seen anything and for
sure I cannot comment on anything like
that but I I mean personally I haven't
heard and that's the first time I hear
about such a thing um I think it doesn't
make any sense honestly uh because
anyway everyone knows that the the
amount of Aid that has been for example
stockpiled at uh at some un agencies um
stocks is hardly enough for short
duration um so I I really don't think um
I wouldn't imagine from where would this
be coming from under all this heavy
bombardment and as we see how there is
nothing that moves into Gaza I I would
doubt it very much but again I don't
have the full information let me bring
in Dr mayard uh now Dr mayard there are
children still being born in Gaza today
there's no water still little food and
the situation is becoming worse what are
the most urgent needs right now what
would you see those eight would you
would you like to see those eight
convoys carrying into Gaza once they're
allowed in
yes I mean I I think that the I think
it's rather fanciful to think that
opening up one border at Rafa is going
to get enough Aid in to service the
whole of Gaza um most of the roads from
the hospitals have been destroyed
certainly at shifa all the access roads
have been bombed and are impossible so
the notion that that large numbers of
patients and and civilians can be
evacuated through one opening down at
Rafer I think is is frankly fanciful um
so I I think there needs to be a a lift
of The Siege completely and
the many more border crossings that can
be opened from Israel need to be open to
allow Aid to come in that way speaking
from the UK perspective I know Medical
Aid for Palestine has got many healthc
care workers who are poised to come and
go in and help and I'm sure other
countries will be the same so the minute
the minute Aid is allowed in and it
needs to be allowed in from all the
borders right that that really happen
needs to happen in the in the next day
or two and even if the aid is allowed in
Dr mayard it's not going to be a light
switch is it I mean even if Aid gets in
it doesn't mean that a humanitarian
crisis is
averted most certainly not uh because I
think it's gone too far down that road
now to to to avert it and the the the
the grave risk of of widespread
infectious diseases will remain uh there
are many people who are injured uh and
may not be saved anyway so it won't be
an immediate turnaround but I think once
once there is no fuel for the generators
once there is no water once there is no
there are no blood products which are
running out then there will be a total
collapse of the Health Care System Sarah
what about creating safe corridors
what's the potential for that to happen
in the near
future
okay I would like just to commend that
today a un uh uh Security Council
resolution has been blocked as a an
initiative uh to result in a resolution
of course to stop the fire in Gaza and
that has been blocked the unra and The
Who and the UNICEF are doing great job
but it's it's it's very contradicting
how the politics behind this conflict is
blocking those un agencies from carrying
out their own missions it's very
important to uh uh point out that Israel
has to respect human rights and let the
humanitarian corridors uh uh work out
for all Palestinians and stopping fire
is a must first and hopefully in the
future no un Security Council
resolutions in that uh matter would be
blocked yeah the politics are really
important in all this the us we know has
appointed what they're saying is a
special Envoy for Middle Eastern
humanitarian issues President Biden is
heading to the region in the next few
days do you think Biden Sarah can push
things over the line when he visits uh
Wednesday on the humanitarian
question this is why Egypt Egypt wanted
the US uh uh supervision over that uh
fast deal to let the humanitarian Aid in
and that's why president AB the fat C
called for an international Summit on
the Palestinian cuse next Saturday 21st
of October and it's very important in
this arming to stop and end this war if
President Biden wants to impress uh uh
inside the US and out he would help in
resolving this conflict njla I'll give
you the last word in Gaza I know you're
talking to us under very difficult
circum circumstances very difficult
conditions what would you like to see
happen in the immediate what would what
is is your message to the International
Community
today uh my message to the International
Community is uh is actually a question
until when I mean what should happen to
stop this to make this madness
stop um because once we are focusing on
the humanitarian crisis we're also
forgetting that Israel is killing every
day tens of Palestinians and also
destroying more and more of the infrast
ruction of our neighborhoods uh in in in
Gaza and uh it's simply nobody's able to
stop stop that and uh I think the world
should uh should stop this double
standard uh and remember that we are
equally human Palestinians and uh and
the rest of the world the other thing is
that there must be an immediate
immediate uh humanitarian C fire at
least to try and and and minimize the
the hardship in the shelters where there
are thousands of people suffering every
minute and I'm I'm I'm only experiencing
a sample of that and it's it's very very
difficult njla thank you so much njla
thank you for talking to us njla shaad
Dr Nick mayard and Sarah Kira thank you
to all three of you for joining us on
inside story today and thank you too for
watching you can always watch this
program again anytime by visiting our
website at al.com for further discussion
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and of
course you can join the conversation on
X our handle is at AJ insid story from
me f batibo and the whole team here in
Doha thanks for watching bye for
now